+++
title = "Talks"
path = "talks"
date = 2023-11-19
[extra]
hidden = true
+++

## The Highlights

These are the talks I'm most proud of:

- [NixCon 2025 - You can't spell "devshell" without "hell"](#nixcon-2025)
- [RustConf 2023 - Async Building Blocks: A Streaming Data Drama in Three Acts](#rustconf-2023)

## NixCon 2025 - You can't spell "devshell" without "hell" {#nixcon-2025}

This talk is a deep dive into how "development shells" work, like those provided by `nix develop` and `flox activate`.

It begins with a discussion about how `nix develop` works under the hood to collect the variables and functions that need to be set in the shell, then materializes the developer shell be generating an RC script for Bash to source.

The next portion of the talk discusses how `flox activate` works to provide the following benefits:
- Near instantaneous startup
- Support for shells other than Bash (Zsh, tcsh, and my beloved Fish)
- Support for background services like you'd get with `docker-compose`
- Automatic cleanup of those services when you exit your shell
- Explicit support for activating more than one environment at a time

Sprinkled in are some moments poking fun at the hoops you have to jump through in order to make this all work.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/blob/master/2025-09-06%20-%20nixcon%20zurich/presentation.pdf)

[Video](https://media.ccc.de/v/nixcon2025-56410-you-cant-spell-devshell)

## LambdaConf 2025 - The Next Generation of Developer Environments

This talk is a whirlwind tour of Flox, and how I truly believe that it represents the next generation of developer environments. Why?

- The reproducibility of Nix, with the familiar user experience of a package manager.
- Much faster startup time compared to `nix develop`.
- Easy composition so you can build a developer environment out of other developer environments.
- Much lighter weight to create, edit, and modify than containers (no need to rebuild the whole thing after an edit).
- Painless context switching via layering activations of Flox environments.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/blob/master/2025-05-12%20-%20lambdaconf/lambdaconf.key)

{{youtube(id="ent_gtptqkc")}}

## RustConf 2023 - Async Building Blocks: A Streaming Data Drama in Three Acts {#rustconf-2023}

This talk is an intermediate level tour of some features of the async Rust ecosystem. 

Abstract:
> Learn how to put together a streaming data system from building blocks in Rust's async ecosystem by following Mary Message on her daring journey to deliver her data. Along the way you'll meet a cast of characters including Pablo PubSub and Beatrix Buffer as you learn about streams, tasks, synchronization, buffering, and the trade offs involved in each.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2023-09-14%20-%20rustconf)

{{ youtube(id="hU-lKbAdOUg")}}

## NixCon 2023 - Rust + Nix: More than the sum of their parts?

Abstract:
> Rust is a programming language with a knack for ergonomics in a space where robustness, correctness, and speed often come at the cost of many papercuts. Nix is a project focused on building software in a robust, correct, and deterministic way. These two projects should be best friends, right? In this talk Zach Mitchell from flox and the Documentation Team will give an experience report writing Rust bindings for Nix. What makes bindings difficult? Which bindings can be autogenerated? Which can (or should) be written by hand? Tune in to find out what went well, what was painful, and what didn't work at all.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2023-09-09%20-%20nixcon)

{{ youtube(id="C5H9wfl6VT0") }}

## Indy.rs 2022-03-02 - An optimization story

This was a presentation based on the [blog post with the same name](@/fmo-optimization-story.md).

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2022-03-02%20-%20indyrs%20-%20optimization%20story)

## Rust Belt Rust 2019 - monarch (lightning talk)

This talk was about a testing technique called "metamorphic testing" (note: not the same thing as _mutation_ testing). I wrote a proof of concept testing library called [monarch](https://github.com/zmitchell/monarch) (metamorphic testing -> metamorphosis -> butterflies -> Monarch) based around this technique.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2019-10-18%20-%20rust%20belt%20rust%20-%20monarch)

{{ youtube(id="RdpHONoFsSs")}}

## Indy.rs 2019-06-05 - polsim

This talk was a presentation based on the [Polsim - a case study for small-scale scientific computing in Rust](@/polsim.md) post.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2019-06-05%20-%20indyrs%20-%20polsim).

## PyOhio 2018 - Abusing type annotations (lightning talk)

This talk was a demonstration of how you could do something like Rust's procedural macros in Python using decorators to play around with the AST and do code generation. There's even an ASCII-art Clippy! After the talk I wrote a [blog post on the topic](@/abusing-type-annotations.md). This is only the second software talk I'd ever given, so that presentation isn't my best work, but it was a fun topic.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2018-07-28%20-%20pyohio%20-%20annotation%20abuse)

{{ youtube(id="sCChedxFCuo", timestamp="142")}}

## Indy.rs 2018-04-04 - Cache-friendly Rust

This was my first ever software talk, and probably only my seond time attending Indy.rs. Needless to say I was nervous.

[Slides](https://github.com/zmitchell/talks/tree/master/2018-04-04%20-%20indyrs%20-%20cache%20friendly%20rust)
